build: Update bundled Apache Arrow to 21.0.0 from 15.0.0 (#14102)
facebookincubator/velox: CMake/resolve_dependency_modules/arrow/CMakeLists.txt

  else()
    set(THRIFT_SOURCE "BUNDLED")
  endif()

>   # Apache Arrow 21.0.0 uses 0.22.0 as the bundled Apache Thrift. We can remove
>   # this after 22.0.0 release because this will be used by default. See also:
>   # https://github.com/apache/arrow/issues/47111

Reviewer: This comment is a bit confusing as it doesn't mention that this is just another (more stable) mirror for thrift. How about:
```suggestion
  # Apache Arrow 21.0.0 uses archive.apache.org as the default mirror, which tends to timeout in CI.
  # We don't need to explicitly set this alternate mirror after the 22.0.0 release because this will be
  # used by default. See also: https://github.com/apache/arrow/issues/47111
```

Author: Thanks. I've applied your suggestion.

      -DARROW_WITH_ZLIB=ON
      -DARROW_WITH_ZSTD=ON
      -DARROW_JEMALLOC=OFF

>       -DARROW_MIMALLOC=OFF

Reviewer: Why the addition, for consistency?

Author: If we enable mimalloc, we need to link bundled mimalloc explicitly:

https://github.com/facebookincubator/velox/actions/runs/16584498129/job/46907117555?pr=14102#step:7:7071

```text
FAILED: [code=1] velox/vector/arrow/tests/velox_arrow_bridge_test 
: && /usr/bin/c++ -mavx2 -mfma -mavx -mf16c -mlzcnt -mbmi2 -D USE_VELOX_COMMON_BASE -D HAS_UNCAUGHT_EXCEPTIONS -DFOLLY_CFG_NO_COROUTINES -Wall -Wextra -Wno-unused        -Wno-unused-parameter        -Wno-sign-compare        -Wno-ignored-qualifiers        -Wno-implicit-fallthrough          -Wno-class-memaccess          -Wno-comment          -Wno-int-in-bool-context          -Wno-redundant-move          -Wno-array-bounds          -Wno-maybe-uninitialized          -Wno-unused-result          -Wno-format-overflow          -Wno-strict-aliasing -Werror -g -Wl,-export-dynamic velox/vector/arrow/tests/CMakeFiles/velox_arrow_bridge_test.dir/ArrowBridgeArrayTest.cpp.o velox/vector/arrow/tests/CMakeFiles/velox_arrow_bridge_test.dir/ArrowBridgeSchemaTest.cpp.o -o velox/vector/arrow/tests/velox_arrow_bridge_test  velox/core/libvelox_core.a  velox/vector/arrow/libvelox_arrow_bridge.a  velox/vector/tests/utils/libvelox_vector_test_lib.a  CMake/resolve_dependency_modules/arrow/arrow_ep/install/lib/libarrow.a  lib/libgtest.a  lib/libgtest_main.a  _deps/glog-build/libglogd.a  -ldl  velox/connectors/libvelox_connector.a  velox/expression/libvelox_expression_functions.a  velox/expression/type_calculation/libvelox_type_calculation.a  velox/expression/signature_parser/libvelox_signature_parser.a  lib/libgtest.a  velox/vector/libvelox_vector.a  velox/row/libvelox_row_fast.a  velox/vector/libvelox_vector.a  velox/row/libvelox_row_fast.a  velox/common/caching/libvelox_caching.a  velox/common/config/libvelox_common_config.a  velox/common/base/libvelox_exception.a  velox/common/memory/libvelox_memory.a  velox/type/libvelox_type.a  velox/buffer/libvelox_buffer.a  velox/common/base/libvelox_common_base.a  velox/common/file/libvelox_file.a  velox/common/process/libvelox_process.a  velox/common/time/libvelox_time.a  velox/common/testutil/libvelox_test_util.a  velox/type/tz/libvelox_type_tz.a  velox/common/serialization/libvelox_serialization.a  velox/common/compression/libvelox_common_compression.a  velox/common/caching/libvelox_caching.a  velox/common/config/libvelox_common_config.a  velox/common/base/libvelox_exception.a  velox/common/memory/libvelox_memory.a  velox/type/libvelox_type.a  velox/buffer/libvelox_buffer.a  velox/common/base/libvelox_common_base.a  velox/common/file/libvelox_file.a  velox/common/process/libvelox_process.a  velox/common/time/libvelox_time.a  velox/common/testutil/libvelox_test_util.a  velox/type/tz/libvelox_type_tz.a  velox/common/serialization/libvelox_serialization.a  velox/common/compression/libvelox_common_compression.a  velox/common/encode/libvelox_encode.a  _deps/re2-build/libre2.a  _deps/absl-build/absl/log/libabsl_log_internal_check_op.a  _deps/absl-build/absl/log/libabsl_log_internal_conditions.a  _deps/absl-build/absl/log/libabsl_log_internal_message.a  _deps/absl-build/absl/log/libabsl_log_internal_nullguard.a  _deps/absl-build/absl/debugging/libabsl_examine_stack.a  _deps/absl-build/absl/log/libabsl_log_internal_format.a  _deps/absl-build/absl/log/libabsl_log_internal_proto.a  _deps/absl-build/absl/log/libabsl_log_internal_log_sink_set.a  _deps/absl-build/absl/log/libabsl_log_internal_globals.a  _deps/absl-build/absl/log/libabsl_log_globals.a  _deps/absl-build/absl/log/libabsl_log_sink.a  _deps/absl-build/absl/log/libabsl_log_entry.a  _deps/absl-build/absl/base/libabsl_strerror.a  _deps/absl-build/absl/log/libabsl_vlog_config_internal.a  _deps/absl-build/absl/log/libabsl_log_internal_fnmatch.a  _deps/absl-build/absl/flags/libabsl_flags_internal.a  _deps/absl-build/absl/flags/libabsl_flags_marshalling.a  _deps/absl-build/absl/flags/libabsl_flags_reflection.a  _deps/absl-build/absl/flags/libabsl_flags_config.a  _deps/absl-build/absl/flags/libabsl_flags_program_name.a  _deps/absl-build/absl/flags/libabsl_flags_private_handle_accessor.a  _deps/absl-build/absl/flags/libabsl_flags_commandlineflag.a  _deps/absl-build/absl/flags/libabsl_flags_commandlineflag_internal.a  _deps/absl-build/absl/strings/libabsl_cord.a  _deps/absl-build/absl/strings/libabsl_cordz_info.a  _deps/absl-build/absl/strings/libabsl_cord_internal.a  _deps/absl-build/absl/strings/libabsl_cordz_functions.a  _deps/absl-build/absl/strings/libabsl_cordz_handle.a  _deps/absl-build/absl/crc/libabsl_crc_cord_state.a  _deps/absl-build/absl/crc/libabsl_crc32c.a  _deps/absl-build/absl/crc/libabsl_crc_internal.a  _deps/absl-build/absl/crc/libabsl_crc_cpu_detect.a  _deps/absl-build/absl/container/libabsl_raw_hash_set.a  _deps/absl-build/absl/container/libabsl_hashtablez_sampler.a  _deps/absl-build/absl/profiling/libabsl_exponential_biased.a  _deps/absl-build/absl/hash/libabsl_hash.a  _deps/absl-build/absl/hash/libabsl_city.a  _deps/absl-build/absl/types/libabsl_bad_variant_access.a  _deps/absl-build/absl/hash/libabsl_low_level_hash.a  _deps/absl-build/absl/types/libabsl_bad_optional_access.a  _deps/absl-build/absl/strings/libabsl_str_format_internal.a  _deps/absl-build/absl/synchronization/libabsl_synchronization.a  _deps/absl-build/absl/synchronization/libabsl_graphcycles_internal.a  _deps/absl-build/absl/synchronization/libabsl_kernel_timeout_internal.a  _deps/absl-build/absl/debugging/libabsl_stacktrace.a  _deps/absl-build/absl/debugging/libabsl_symbolize.a  _deps/absl-build/absl/base/libabsl_malloc_internal.a  _deps/absl-build/absl/debugging/libabsl_debugging_internal.a  _deps/absl-build/absl/debugging/libabsl_demangle_internal.a  _deps/absl-build/absl/time/libabsl_time.a  _deps/absl-build/absl/strings/libabsl_strings.a  _deps/absl-build/absl/strings/libabsl_strings_internal.a  _deps/absl-build/absl/strings/libabsl_string_view.a  _deps/absl-build/absl/base/libabsl_base.a  _deps/absl-build/absl/base/libabsl_spinlock_wait.a  -lrt  _deps/absl-build/absl/base/libabsl_throw_delegate.a  _deps/absl-build/absl/base/libabsl_raw_logging_internal.a  _deps/absl-build/absl/base/libabsl_log_severity.a  _deps/absl-build/absl/numeric/libabsl_int128.a  _deps/absl-build/absl/time/libabsl_civil_time.a  _deps/absl-build/absl/time/libabsl_time_zone.a  /usr/lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/libicuuc.so  velox/flag_definitions/libvelox_flag_definitions.a  velox/external/tzdb/libvelox_external_tzdb.a  velox/external/date/libvelox_external_date.a  velox/common/base/libvelox_status.a  _deps/folly-build/libfolly.a  _deps/glog-build/libglogd.a  _deps/boost-build/libs/random/libboost_random.a  _deps/gflags-build/libgflags_nothreads_debug.a  _deps/boost-build/libs/context/libboost_context.a  _deps/boost-build/libs/filesystem/libboost_filesystem.a  _deps/boost-build/libs/program_options/libboost_program_options.a  _deps/boost-build/libs/thread/libboost_thread.a  _deps/boost-build/libs/atomic/libboost_atomic.a  _deps/boost-build/libs/date_time/libboost_date_time.a  _deps/boost-build/libs/container/libboost_container.a  _deps/boost-build/libs/chrono/libboost_chrono.a  _deps/boost-build/libs/exception/libboost_exception.a  /usr/lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/libdouble-conversion.so  /usr/lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/libevent.so  /usr/lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/libz.so  /usr/lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/libssl.so  /usr/lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/libcrypto.so  /usr/lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/libbz2.so  /usr/lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/liblzma.so  /usr/lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/liblz4.so  /usr/lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/libzstd.so  /usr/lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/libsnappy.so  /usr/lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/libdwarf.so  /usr/lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/libsodium.so  -ldl  /usr/lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/libunwind.so  _deps/fmt-build/libfmtd.a  /usr/lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/liblz4.so  CMake/resolve_dependency_modules/arrow/arrow_ep/src/arrow_ep-build/lib/libthrift.a && :
/usr/bin/ld: CMake/resolve_dependency_modules/arrow/arrow_ep/install/lib/libarrow.a(memory_pool.cc.o): in function `arrow::(anonymous namespace)::MimallocAllocator::AllocateAligned(long, long, unsigned char**)':
/home/runner/work/velox/velox/velox/_build/debug/CMake/resolve_dependency_modules/arrow/arrow_ep/src/arrow_ep/cpp/src/arrow/memory_pool.cc:404: undefined reference to `mi_malloc_aligned'
/usr/bin/ld: CMake/resolve_dependency_modules/arrow/arrow_ep/install/lib/libarrow.a(memory_pool.cc.o): in function `arrow::(anonymous namespace)::MimallocAllocator::ReleaseUnused()':
/home/runner/work/velox/velox/velox/_build/debug/CMake/resolve_dependency_modules/arrow/arrow_ep/src/arrow_ep/cpp/src/arrow/memory_pool.cc:411: undefined reference to `mi_collect'
/usr/bin/ld: CMake/resolve_dependency_modules/arrow/arrow_ep/install/lib/libarrow.a(memory_pool.cc.o): in function `arrow::(anonymous namespace)::MimallocAllocator::ReallocateAligned(long, long, long, unsigned char**)':
/home/runner/work/velox/velox/velox/_build/debug/CMake/resolve_dependency_modules/arrow/arrow_ep/src/arrow_ep/cpp/src/arrow/memory_pool.cc:426: undefined reference to `mi_realloc_aligned'
/usr/bin/ld: CMake/resolve_dependency_modules/arrow/arrow_ep/install/lib/libarrow.a(memory_pool.cc.o): in function `arrow::(anonymous namespace)::MimallocAllocator::DeallocateAligned(unsigned char*, long, long)':
/home/runner/work/velox/velox/velox/_build/debug/CMake/resolve_dependency_modules/arrow/arrow_ep/src/arrow_ep/cpp/src/arrow/memory_pool.cc:438: undefined reference to `mi_free'
/usr/bin/ld: CMake/resolve_dependency_modules/arrow/arrow_ep/install/lib/libarrow.a(memory_pool.cc.o): in function `arrow::(anonymous namespace)::MimallocAllocator::PrintStats()':
/home/runner/work/velox/velox/velox/_build/debug/CMake/resolve_dependency_modules/arrow/arrow_ep/src/arrow_ep/cpp/src/arrow/memory_pool.cc:442: undefined reference to `mi_stats_print_out'
collect2: error: ld returned 1 exit status
```

We can do it by something like the following:

```diff
diff --git a/CMake/resolve_dependency_modules/arrow/CMakeLists.txt b/CMake/resolve_dependency_modules/arrow/CMakeLists.txt
index 4feb33777..9e7aef983 100644
--- a/CMake/resolve_dependency_modules/arrow/CMakeLists.txt
+++ b/CMake/resolve_dependency_modules/arrow/CMakeLists.txt
@@ -103,6 +103,7 @@ if(VELOX_ENABLE_ARROW)
                                    ${ARROW_PREFIX}/install/include)
   set_target_properties(arrow PROPERTIES IMPORTED_LOCATION
                                          ${ARROW_LIBDIR}/libarrow.a)
+  target_link_libraries(arrow INTERFACE ${ARROW_LIBDIR}/...)
   set_property(TARGET arrow PROPERTY INTERFACE_LINK_LIBRARIES ${RE2} thrift)
   set_target_properties(
     arrow_testing PROPERTIES IMPORTED_LOCATION
```

But it'll increase maintenance cost and build time (a bit).

Should we enable mimalloc? Or can we disable mimalloc?

Author: I disable mimalloc for easy to maintain.

Memory allocator will not have a large performance impact for Arrow usage in Velox.

    URL ${VELOX_ARROW_SOURCE_URL}
    URL_HASH ${VELOX_ARROW_BUILD_SHA256_CHECKSUM}
    SOURCE_SUBDIR cpp
    CMAKE_COMMAND ${CMAKE_COMMAND}
    -E
    env

>     ARROW_THRIFT_URL=${THRIFT_URL}

Reviewer: This might be confusing for people not so familiar with cmake, can we add a comment explaining that this is needed, because ep doens't inherit (env) variables?
